# Objective Evaluation of the Effects of Ramadan Fasting on Nasal Respiratory Function.

> **PMID:** 42160037 | **DOI:** 10.1097/SCS.0000000000012931 | **PMC:** None
> **Journal:** The Journal of craniofacial surgery | **Published:** 2026-05-20
> **Authors:** Doğan Çakan, Hüseyin Baki Yilmaz, Harun Cansiz, Haluk Çevik, Alice Ky Siu et al.

---

## Abstract

Previous studies are insufficient concerning the impact of fasting on nasal functions. This study aimed to investigate the effects of Ramadan fasting (RF) on nasal respiratory function (NRF) utilizing objective assessments, based on the hypothesis that RF leads to functional improvement in healthy subjects. Forty-one male and 21 female subjects were included in this prospective study. The nasal volume, minimal cross-sectional area (MCA)s, total airflow (TF), total resistance (TR) values, and breathing comfort were determined by acoustic rhinometry, rhinomanometry, and visual analog scale (VAS) initially (baseline) and on the first and last day (30th) of RF. The outcomes were analyzed statistically. Significant differences were found in the analysis of nasal MCAs (P=0.001), volumes (P=0.001), TF (P=0.001), and TR (P=0.008), and VAS values (P=0.0001) at different times. The TF (P=0.003), TR (P=0.019), right (P=0.001) and left (P=0.001) MCAs, right (P=0.002) and left (P=0.001) volumes, and VAS (P=0.001) values detected on 30th day were significantly higher than baseline. Furthermore, the TF (P=0.003), and TR (P=0.02), right (P=0.001) and left (P=0.0001) MCAs, right (P=0.002) and left (P=0.001) volumes, and VAS (P=0.001) values measured on 30th day were significantly higher than first day (P<.05). The present findings suggest that RF may have a positive effect on NRF.

---

## Keywords
Acoustic rhinometry, fasting, nasal obstruction* / diagnosis, nose / physiology*, rhinomanometry

---

## Artifact Metadata
- **Retrieved:** 2026-05-26
- **Local File Path:** workspace/articles-MCAS/2026-05-20/42160037.md
- **Full Text Path:** workspace/articles-MCAS/2026-05-20/42160037-full.txt
